hello everybody good morning
um good morning
um morning good morning
it is a thrill it's an honor for me to
be here with Dr Siddhartha Mukherjee who
has not only an incredible career as a
physician as a scientist but of course
as we know also as a writer as an author
someone who communicates about science
and medicine uh every bit as brilliantly
as he practices science and medicine and
has become truly the historian for so
many of us when we try to understand the
things that affect all of our lives from
cancer to so much else so I just told
Sid Dr Mukherjee I have a million
questions but we only have 45 minutes
but I do want to start with a kind of
basic
you've you've written about so many
things you have this you know
award-winning book you wrote about
cancer the Emperor of all maladies you
wrote brilliantly again about the gene
uh the human the thing that ties us all
together now you decided then you
decided to write about the cell
it's not something we think about every
hour of the day
but as you write it affects everything
around us everything in our lives why
did you want to do this
so um
this project goes back a long way and
it's a it's a little bit like Star Wars
because there are prequels to sequels to
prequels to sequels
um
obviously when I there there are two
ways to read this book
um or read my books one way is to start
with the gene as the fundamental unit of
information
then Ascend to the cell
and then finally Ascend to the
dysfunctional cells which would be
cancer that's one way to read the book
it's not chronological it's just the way
that the books came out and in the end
when they become a quartet and we'll
talk about the last
possible of book in the quartet
it'll become what I call the life
quartet an exploration of
who we are as humans how we become
humans what we know about ourselves as
humans at the genetic at the cellular
and at the pathological level
um that's that's the broad strokes but
let me tell you the particular Genesis
of this book which is important and
there are two strands
that connect this book
the first strand is that for the longest
time in medicine and in science
in science I would say General Sciences
there was this perception that biology
of all the Sciences because it's
youngest
um is a kind of Lawless science
there are no there are few common
principles I mean you look at the
diversity of life around Europe that
palm tree and
this gentleman who's sitting in front of
us
I think look nothing like each other
is that a fair
Fair assessment
um exactly so
but they're all two forms of life
so
the question is are there
what are and are there deeper strands
that that are not perceptible is
probably a lizard outside there's a
bird flying up in the sky
what connects us what what is the thread
that connects this vast but
extraordinarily diverse looking
um
thing that we call life
An Occurrence out there are these things
that connect us
and they're incredible so the first
thing that connects us is evolution
the theory now you could even
potentially call it the law
starting with Darwin evolving into much
much more complex ideas but evolution
runs through the space the
um you know
um
I
being a being a literary person I I I I
I'm this this is just coming to mind uh
that incredible line from
Dylan Thomas's poem the force that
through the
green leaves drives the flower drives my
life I'm misquoting it but it's just
this incredible idea that there is a
force
one force is evolution
it connects us all
there are thousand books in evolution
you can read them
um Dawkins has written about it there
are I can quote a thousand
the second is the universality or the
universal law of genetics genes as units
of information
the Thousand books on genes I've written
one of them but
um but you can find lots and lots of
books about genetics and how we're
connected how that palm tree shares
basically the same kind of idea of
genetic information than our friend over
here right
and then there's a third law
and that is cell theory
that all of us
Birds beasts lizards animals are made
out of cells
and what's amazing about it is when I
start writing a book I start thinking to
myself
what's not been written before
and I thought to myself well here is the
universal principle just as universal as
Evolution just as universal as genetics
and you can't find a book on what cells
are you can find some but it's the you
know you can't find the book A book
about something that is as fundamental
it's like saying you can't find a book
that explains
Einstein's theory of
special relativity or general relativity
you can't find a book about Newton
it would be it would be akin to saying
that for for biology and I thought to
myself that's one reason so that's one
strand and then even more
surprisingly we are in the middle of
a cellular Revolution
and by that I mean we're changing cells
we're doing things with cells we'll talk
about some of this we're putting bone
marrow into into humans in India I I
just came back from India we've treated
15 patients a company that I started
with T cells and eradicated their
cancers there's a 10 year old boy
um whose picture I have in my you know
probably the proudest moment of my life
I there's a 10 year old boy and I'll
tell you the story in a second there's a
10 year old boy who came in with
relapsed refractory leukemia he would
have been dead that is a death sentence
he is now three years of his
treatment playing cricket and he came
and asked me can I also play football
and I said you can play anything
because you are cured you are
c-u-r-e-d cured yeah because of cellular
therapy so I I and and around the world
if I told people that they would say
what what are you doing what's happening
and so these two ideas the historical
importance yeah and I would say the
heuristic importance and then the
current importance the the the the the
the the the the
Vitality the vivacity with which we are
taking and manipulating cells making new
things making new medical products was
completely not there just in the same
way when I wrote the Emperor of all
melodies people didn't know about cancer
in that in in the way that book was
written so that's
the Genesis of this book that and I want
to talk to you about I want you to talk
about
um um why this is happening now I mean
what led to it and you have some really
phenomenal stories in this book of what
scientists over the century what five
centuries five or six centuries have
done at moments in time that led to
where we are but I'm I have to ask you
about the title the song of the cell
I mean you're clearly somebody who's
who's um as you said yourself literary
you read a lot you weave that into
almost every page of the book
um as you write about you know something
that's complicated science but why songs
so two reasons um but let me talk a
little bit about processing lots of
writers here
um and I don't know how people title
their books but I can tell you how I
titled my books
um I have a I have a prospective title
when I start a book
um and inevitably it's not going to be
the final title I just put it in there
because otherwise I can't move along
um my writing process is very unusual I
start from the first word and ended the
last word if someone sends tells me move
things around
and you know put something in the middle
and just move on
that doesn't work for me I get if I get
stuck I get stuck until I get until I
can solve the problem where I'm stuck I
can't finish a book
and that's why I need help from editors
editors can help you get unstuck but
they can't tell you someone can't tell
you like you like you can do these days
you know let I know you're going to
write about this leave this chunk alone
and move on and the reason is that
books especially in non-fiction but also
in fiction books are stitched together
like clothes
when you make a jacket you can't say
I'll come back to the
right sleeve later
right
you have to put the whole thing together
and the seams and this is very important
the seams of a book
are where a book really sits
and the more invisible they become the
better the book is the better the
writing is
and so when you move from one topic to
another topic you may be moving moving
centuries you may be moving from a
patient's story
to uh to someone discovering something
under the microscope there's a seam
between those two places
if a reader detects that seam the book
is gone
because the artifice of writing is to
make that scene vanish
and so
I'm saying all of this because I usually
put a tentative title in and then I come
back to the title the title came very
late in the book and it refers to two
ideas number one is that every cell
sings out its own song and by that I
mean that every cell in your body aside
from a couple sperm and egg
every cell in your body has the same
genetic information
your brain cell
and your liver cell and the T cell in
your body the B cell everyone has the
same genetic information and yet
they are completely different in their
Form and Function they're doing
completely different things and it's
very much it reminded me both of Indian
music
and of any music in which you hand
someone a score a song
but if you hand Judy a song she'll sing
it differently than if you hand me a
song
and in the same way a B cell and a T
cell and a brain cell both have the same
score
but they're playing it out differently
they're playing out different songs and
in doing so becoming different things
and allowing themselves to become
different things that's one song that is
what I call the known song of the cell
we now know very much about why and how
these two cells which are very different
from each other can sing out different
songs
what we don't know is the second song
which is that this that cells are also
talking to each other
and there is a little I would really
encourage people to read the last two to
three chapters of the book where I
handled the question of complexity
how do we build complexity out of these
individual songs how is it that when
there's a pandemic
and a virus infects your body the entire
body has to coordinate a response it's
not one cell but your entire cellular
Cosmos has to intersect and and create a
response those are the songs that move
between cells
and we are yet to understand all of them
so there's two meanings in the book of
the word song and it and it does carry
throughout the story you weave in
um as as we mentioned a minute ago these
really I mean you feel you're in the
room with some of these scientists going
back centuries
um what were the most what were one or
two of the most important sort of
signposts or developments along the way
that led us to where we are today when
as you say we are making these explosive
uh new uh the ability to do explosive
new things with cells
well I think the the
I mean the the the the history begins
with microscopy
um and often this is the story of all of
all science there's an instrument or a
tool that comes about
which seems to be unrelated microscopy
is basically putting two lenses together
um but the way you put them together and
the way you manage to put them together
and look down into the universe so you
know the The Story begins with these
two extremely eccentric very different
character Lewin Hulk
um in in delft right
um looking down a microscope a single a
lens microscope which you have to hold
up to the sunlight and finding that in
fact on sitting inside water
where it were thousands of
what he called animal cues single-celled
organisms
and then
on the other hand Robert Hook who was
everything he was a scientist he was a
doctor he was an architect he was a you
know a scientific illustrator he was an
anatomist he also built a microscope
looked down and found that in tissues
plant tissues he could find these boxes
he called them boxes and then finally
decided that he would call them Chella
after
the word for a prison cell or a small
box and that's the discovery of cells so
that begins the history of Cell Biology
that is the moment where all of a sudden
we realize that we aren't built out of
slabs of meat
but in fact underneath if you look at
the slabs of meat that we are seemingly
built out of they're actually small
units and we're built in a unitary way
just like a Lego block and it's
incredibly important I connect it to you
describe as a grad student looking down
I think you said you had ground up a
mouse spleen I did and you were lost
and what you saw you said was very
exciting
uh
what happened how so
so you know it's um so you have an
organism right Mouse uh you have a plant
you're a human
and again you think of these as they
appear to be slabs of meat
um
but then you take a spleen you grind it
up and you put it into cell culture
and you separate out all the cellular
components of it you add some factors to
make them live and then you wait for two
days and all of a sudden
the things that were in the spleen this
individual cells you can see them and
they come to life they're they're living
uh
and I don't know how to convey the
excitement of this
you've
you're culturing life
it's a living being it has autonomy
it has agency it has a it has function
it has a capacity to do something and
it's doing something in your body
what used to be on Friday a slab of meat
has now on Monday become a unit
and you know that that unit
is what's making you live now unless you
see it unless you do it or write about
it
hard to convey the excitement of it it's
living it's a it's a living thing you've
made in a in a dish a living thing with
autonomous agency and function
and now you can study what it does
you can infect it with a virus
you can make it do what cells do they
move around
they search for things they
do things that make us live
and it's incredibly exciting and if you
can't get excited about that I just
don't know what you can get excited
about
you've got to read this book I mean that
I mean that page Pages still jumps out
at me and you do bring it to life
um said Mukherjee so fast forward to a
lot of time to where we are right now or
in the last few years where we have
figured out ways to take these cells and
do really amazing things I don't even
have the language to describe what I
mean the kind of thing you mentioned a
moment ago with the boy and you dedicate
the book to a young who was then a young
girl and today she's a grown woman yeah
she was seven when she received
therapy with T cells she is now 18 and
applying to college
um she would have been
she had also relapsed refractory
leukemia
and and it it you there was no there's
no other treatment so she got T-cell
therapies and
um and is now as I said applying to
college it's Emily Emily Whitehead yes
and and she is lovely photograph of her
in the book yeah it's almost I mean it's
almost miraculous the way you describe
what happened where everything was
downhill and then the T cells
um but what what what changed what was
the can I tell you a story which is the
craziest of all stories and I'm sorry to
to to to derail this but
sometimes
things are so strange that they become
stories and they become stories in books
okay here's the story so I'm just coming
back from India we started a against
Great odds and we just published a a big
paper on this and
it's been in the news a lot we started
and Emily Whitehead Factory in India so
India has now become the world's fifth
largest economy and a couple of us said
to ourselves why isn't this therapy
available in India we should make it
available in India so we
about two years ago started to make this
so
the condition was that
I would would treat the first patient
and the idea of course is to reduce the
cost tenfold if we can
so the the cost is forbidding in the
United States
um
we can talk about numbers it's it's on
the order of
eight hundred thousand dollars for this
treatment
and we can talk about why we can talk
about how etc etc anyway we wanted to
cut it down tenfold at least maybe even
20-fold
um and we've gotten almost there we're
seven Eightfold now every day is it's a
journey every day we cut a little bit
more take off another slice
from from the pie anyway patient one
Emily Whitehead of India
um I go downstairs and I'm opening the
bag this bag as I said is a bag about
this big
and in the United States that bag it
costs more than its weight in gold
so I opened the bag I'm talking to this
child and I say well where are you from
he's been eight years old
um and it turns out he is from Calcutta
which is a city that I visit my parents
are from there
and I said what does your father do and
it turns out so there is one hotel in
Calcutta that I always stay in
which has one floor which is sort of the
floor that I stay stay in and there's
one guard on that floor he's the
concierge of the floor
and this kid basically tells me through
his parents he says my father is the
guard is the concierge of that floor
and
I'm a little bit shocked by all of this
and so this time when I went back
my flight landed in India at 2 A.M in
the morning I went to the hotel I was
totally bleary-eyed I went to my floor
and
outside my roommates it's hard for me to
say this without starting to cry but
outside my room
was sitting the guard the concierge he
had stayed up the entire night
and he was waiting he said I saw your
name on the roster because he they
collected roster and he said you know my
child is alive
um would you come to my house tomorrow
um and I said listen I can't come to
your house tomorrow I have a I'm doing
things but why don't you bring your
child for breakfast
and so I have in my pocket I'm happy to
show you around but
I'm having this pocket me and this child
walking up to me from you know outside
the hotel door now this is a country of
1.3 billion people
of whom 0.1 get leukemia
of whom
0.01 have fathers who happen to be the
concierge
of a hotel that I stay in of whom 0.1
percent have relapsed leukemia of whom
0.001 have been treated on trial of whom
0.01 are cured of Leukemia and listen I
don't believe in larger forces but
sometimes
sometimes man you I just
I just don't know what to say
anyway
um
and by the way that comes there are
that's not the only in fact that's not
in the book this most it's not in the
book it happened it happened last month
but your encounters with other patients
are woven through this book absolutely
and um and I have to say you when you
read it you go back and read it again
and again yeah because these are just
incredibly moving right I'm just looking
for the picture it's it's anonymized so
so anyway uh Judy you can see that the
audience won't see it this is the kid
oh my gosh you all have to come up and
look at this you're going to have you're
going to have a mob up here oh my gosh
he looks wonderful he looks wonderful
can I hold it up yeah hold it up if he's
anonymized so yeah there's a shadow over
his eyes I don't know if you can see
and Alive two years after from a disease
that was is absolutely deadly was a
death sentence five years ago
um anyway uh I thought I'd share that no
one's ever heard it I I just came back
so but the book the book has a number of
of stories like that yeah stories like
that with patients but talk again what
was it that was the key or keys that
made it possible to do this kind of
miraculous stuff today using the cells
whether T cells or other pieces of cells
to do this
you know there's there's a kind of
shoulder of giants phenomenon here which
is incredible because
um you don't you don't wake up one
morning and figure out that there's a T
cell in the body that fights infections
you do it's very step by step so there
is a lineage in which you understand how
the body is made and then you ask the
question a very simple question which
was asked in the 1950s and 60s the
question was why how do we defend
ourselves against Invaders
we're constantly under attack
from various viruses Invaders etc etc
we've run through a global pandemic
what cures what heals us what is the
mechanism what is the immune mechanism
that that heals us ultimately when you
get the influence when you get influenza
why does what influences the virus its
job is to replicate inside cells and
make more copies of itself so why don't
we completely succumb
once we are infected by influenza and
become an influenza Factory for the rest
of walking influenza zombies
why not right
and I love questions like that because
they get to the bottom of things because
you ask the counterfactual the
counterfacture in the 1950s was why
isn't everyone in this room
an influenza or bacterial zombie
walking around making more copies of
that bacterium or influenza that's
infected you why aren't we all coveted
zombies
how do we recover
and that question asked in the 1950s led
to the discoveries
of there must be something there must be
in the body a system
that allows us to fight Invaders
what is that system it's a cellular
system what cells are in it B cells T
cells other cells a whole bunch of them
how do they coordinate with each other
how what signals do they send each other
what happens when you get an infection
and slowly bit by bit like solving a
jigsaw puzzle you suddenly realize that
there are these cells T cells
and then
um you begin to realize that these cells
in fact can be manipulated not just to
fight infections but you can engineer
them so they intersect with genetic
engineering you you can engineer them
potentially to fight cancer
and that's the basis of this new kinds
of cellular therapy but that's not just
one that's just one example you know we
are building skin
we are built from cells we are I'll give
you other examples things you don't
really think about blood transfusion
one of the most common things that
people do you would you know save
childbirth
would be impossible without blood
transfusion
that because once in a while you know
you have a gush of blood and you can't
stop it and it's it's lethal
women would die of bleeding from from
childbirth blood transfusion can only
happen because we identified what cells
were important red blood cells and
identified compatibility which ones were
compatible with each other because if I
give you the wrong blood it won't you
know you'll have a reaction it won't
stay
so IVF yeah is cell therapy so things
that we really think have become you
know we sort of absorbed them and said
you know blah blah blah
but that in fact the consequence of
under slowly understanding that we are
built out of cells that we can
manipulate cells we can transplant cells
we can move them around we can change
them and so all of these new therapies
some of which we take for granted are
really the consequence of understanding
the basic biology of of cells so it's
cancer it's also I mean you write about
diabetes the pancreas
sickle cell anemia the just
extraordinary work that's being done
there there's so many possibilities what
are you I mean at this point what are
you the most
optimistic about
um in terms of advances in the near term
and I by the near term
years
um I think the intersection of Cell
Biology and genetics
and in fact if you took my last two
books and you smashed them together
the intersection of Cell Biology and
genetics is creating a
an incredible Revolution
in medicine
which we have to be good stewards of
um so again in the last chapters of the
book I talk about on one hand very
optimistically about our capacity to
manipulate cells
incredible but also it comes with lots
of problems
the some of the problems are
philosophical
do we once we once we start doing this
manipulating cells increasing changing
cells we really are changing humans and
that's why the subtitle of the book
contains the word new human it's a it's
a provocative word because the question
is who do we become
and then there are some questions that
are philosophical that have to do with
equality and Equity I mean if they're
going to be
you know if they're going to cost eight
hundred thousand dollars
um
most of us won't have access to them and
so who has access to them
um and so there's a series of questions
at the end of the book which have to do
with in on one hand have to do with
autonomy and identity
and the other hand have to do with you
know the economics and the accessibility
of these therapies so on one hand I'm
incredibly optimistic about the the
coalescence of of genetics gene therapy
and and cellular biology but on the
other hand I have pretty serious worries
about what might happen once this is let
loose and and how do I mean you you've
been all over the world you've obviously
spent a lot of time in India you're
working there working here in other
places how do you
how do you see that I mean to me that's
just one of the big big questions coming
out of the book is how to whatever
advances are made
how are decisions made how are who makes
decisions about who gets the benefit of
these treatments and who doesn't well
right now I mean those decisions are so
constrained uh by
um economics about
resources and and things like the
extraordinarily constrained
um
the real question is how to make them
less constrained
um sometimes that help people you know
we're not making gold here
we're making cells there there's a we
are making we're genetically
manipulating cells there are some costs
labor costs associated with it quality
costs associated with it but we're not
spinning gold
um so at some point of time this journey
will end I think with vastly more
accessible variants of these therapies
um and I mean to use a very simple
example you know
a hundred years ago did you did you
think everyone would have cell phones
no it's technologies have scaled they
scaled downwards hopefully
and we I mean obviously need to create
an ecosystem
uh of resources in which these resources
are available to people
that's the resource problem that doesn't
solve the philosophical problem of who
we become once we start doing cellular
manipulations on ourselves that's a
question about stewardship that's a
question about who we are as humans how
we Define ourselves as human what the
new human is
I want you to you and we spoke
beforehand about
um I wanted you to read a little bit of
the book where you refer to Paul
greengard who was someone who was a
mentor yeah and a close friend to you
and and a close friend
um he was in his 90s yes when you
reached out to him but I don't know if
this is the exact page Sid but yeah I
find it yeah there's a part of it but
it's it's integral to telling the story
in the book yeah
um
so
the way just a little bit of background
to this the way that um I I write books
is uh um I think of myself as a kind of
recipient or a filter
um in in which my filter I mean not a
filter that removes things but when you
put a dab of ink on a filter it just
spreads
um
and so
if things happen to me
as a physician as a scientist
kovid and my my confinement
and my my time during that that period
um my father's death
my own my depression my mental anguish
I feel as if if I don't tell you about
that
I would be a lesser writer
um and I would be sort of this kind of
physician
who doesn't seem to experience anything
in their own lives so this piece is it
was published in the guardian this piece
is a very personal piece but I decided
to put I I wrote it because it just felt
natural because if you're going to write
a book about medicine and if you
experience something that is medical it
should be in the book
um so I mean I'm going to read it and
you'll figure out why
um in the spring of 2017
I was overwhelmed by the most profound
wave of depression I've ever experienced
I use the word wave deliberately when it
finally burst on me having crept up
slowly for months I felt as if I was
drowning in a tide of sadness that I
could not swim past her through
superficially my life seemed perfectly
in control but inside I felt drenched in
grief
there were days when getting out of the
bed or retrieving a newspaper outside
the door seemed unfathomably difficult
why
I could not tell part of it perhaps was
coming to terms with my father's death a
year before in the wake of his passing
and thrown myself manically back to work
neglecting to give myself time to time
and space to grieve
some of it was confronting the
inevitability of Aging
I was at the edge of the last year of my
40s staring into what seemed like an
abyss my knees hurt and creaked when I
ran
an abdominal hernia appeared out of
nowhere
the poems that I could recite from
memory
I would now have to search my brains for
words that had gone missing
I heard a fly buzz when I died the
Stillness in my room was like um like
like what
I was becoming fragmented
I was officially entering middle aged
and it wasn't my skin that was beginning
to Sag with my brain
I heard a fly Buzz
I called Paul greengard a professor at
Rockefeller University I'd met green
guard at a retreat in Maine several
years ago and we had recognized each
other as fellow scientists and walked
Walked for a mile on a white pebbled
Windswept Beach talking about cells and
biochemistry
and had become close friends
in the night I'm skipping your head a
little bit in the 1960s and 1970s green
guarded experiments
had led him to think of a novel way
about
cellular communication
neurobiologists who's studying studying
the synapse had largely described the
communication between cells neuronal
cells as a rapid process
but green guard had argued that there
was a different kind of process by which
cells talk to each other
the chemical signal sent out by one
neuron to another create a Cascade of
what he called slow signals in the brain
neuronal signaling from one cell to the
next he argued instigates profound
biochemical and metabolic changes in the
recipient cell in an elaborate Cascade
of chemical signals is passed off which
cause alterations in metabolism and gene
expression in the nature and
concentration of chemical transmitters
and ultimately in the way the cells
communicate with each other
for decades the slow Cascade was
considered peripheral but the
biochemical alterations produced by
neuronal cells the green guard Cascade
is now known to permeate the brain
change the function of neurons and
dictate many of its subsequent
properties
and for this green guard would win the
Nobel Prize the important thing about
that is that
green guard thinks and now we think more
and more
that this slow transmission
is the cause of many many
Neuropsychiatric illnesses
perhaps most interestingly of depression
and that's probably why this is green
guard's hypothesis that just increasing
serotonin in the brain using the
standard antidepressants ssris doesn't
work
it's because it's this slow process that
takes months in which the way the
neurons communicate with each other
that has to be modified
and it can be only modified maybe
through serotonin but probably through
chemicals that we don't even know yet
and once we know those chemicals we can
alter the cells and their communication
between them the slope communication
between them change the synapses and
create a new brain and this goes back to
the new human create a new brain where
the circuits responsible for depression
are finally alleviated it's a completely
new different different way of thinking
about mental and mental pathologies
including schizophrenia Alzheimer's
disease and other diseases but it's a
new way of thinking about things it's
just one example of the many
overuse the word dramatic but dramatic
elements that you
sprinkle through the book that are that
make it yes it's a book about science
you learn so much from it but we learn
about you and who you are and your life
and we learn about these
um uh remarkable people who who are in
your life I see we only have less than
four minutes left but would anyone like
to ask a question the gentleman who's
not the palm tree yes on the first row
Years thank you
thank you
thank you very much
well I think I I would love to say that
we've cured type 1 diabetes using cell
therapy that we've implanted
artificial pancreases into people I'd
love to say that we have
five or six new cellular therapies for
cancer
particularly liquid cancers that have
been successful I'd love to say that we
have advanced
um
IVF so that we are not implanting five
or six embryos into humans but rather
one and and being sure that that one
embryo if people want if the some people
might want to three but
um but if people want one that that
we've been successful in implanting the
single one that we know is going to lead
to a healthy viable child
and finally of course going back to the
questions we asked a little bit before
I'd love to so I'd love to say we've
cured sickle cell anemia I'd love to say
we've cured beta thalassemia I but
finally I'd love to say that we've made
the resources available so that people
who are really in need of these
therapies can access these therapies
without becoming you know without
breaking their Banks and without
breaking the National Bank of of monies
that are available
I know so many people in the room agree
I lost my sister this last year to she
had type 1 diabetes complications we've
got about a minute so if it's a short
question right here
foreign
Emily whiteheads so the question is did
Emily white have had are there no side
effects are there side effects when I
mean this is how medicine evolves Emily
almost died from the side effects
um it's in the book
um because when T cells kill cancer they
go on a kind of Rampage
um that Rampage is very toxic
um in the last five years
um we've learned to manage those side
effects so much so that they've almost
become nil
um they've gone from being deadly to
becoming nil partly because
I mean again life is strange so Emily
Whitehead's case is interesting I'll
just tell you a quick story about her
and then we have maybe one question but
it turned out that Carl June who's a
friend who was treating Emily Whitehead
happened to have a daughter who happened
to have juvenile arthritis who happened
to be treated with a drug which was an
immune suppressant drug for juvenile
arthritis Emily Whitehead was about to
die her cancer was killed but she was
about to die from these rampaging T
cells and Carl June in his great wisdom
decided that
why not try this immune suppressant drug
to dampen down the T cells now that
they've been awoken now that the monster
is awake why don't we put the monster to
sleep again and so overnight they rushed
a requisition and treated this Emily
Whitehead with the drug and completely
changed so all of the T cells went back
into their quiet mode and that's why
she's living that trial was almost dead
so now what we do is we give that drug
um as as a prophylactic
and we've also we also give the doses of
the T cells in in fractions so we don't
give them all that once once swell and
the the I would say the side effect
profile has gone down to basically
nothing uh virtually everyone's fine we
have maybe one last question Judy this
gentleman
yeah I worry I mean so the question is
you know do I do I worry about the
overly reductionistic
uh approach to medicine and the uh this
book I mean the last chapter is exactly
about that
um
I think the word I mean I think I have
to be careful about words here and
definitions so it's easy to define the
reductionist piece of it
um it's very hard to just Define the
holistic piece of it
by holistic I mean
taking into account the whole which
involves taking into account the
intracellular Communications in the
environment diets
nutrition
uh you know how we how our brains
intersect stress inflammation things
like that which we know very little
about
um
that is what I mean by taking the hole
into account
um other people might have different
definitions my general plea has been if
you're going to talk about medicine
holistically
um let's be clear about what the
definitions are because I don't want
slippery definitions
um I want something that I understand I
can test
um that where I can provide proof
to a patient
that is a that is proof that is that
allows the patient to to become well
again
because the problem is when you're a
patient and I know this from my own
experience everyone gives you advice
there's no limitation you know you're on
a bus and someone's giving you advice
about what to do and all you can say is
thank you
um but but you know everyone's
everyone's a doctor everyone's giving
you advice
and so my general plea is and most of
this advice is about what what you would
might call sort of holism and holistic
medicine everyone's saying oh reduce the
stress in your life and and you know a
cancer patient is saying what do you
mean reduce the stress in my life I have
cancer
uh you go reduce the stress in your life
[Laughter]
um and so so I think there is a there is
a side of holistic medicine or holism
which when we become slippery about it
actually ends up blaming the victim and
actually ends up harming people
um and it's really important not to do
that because you can tell everyone to
you know you can tell cancer patients to
to eat Goji berries and stand on their
heads
someone in the bus is going to tell you
that and say that that's the way to cure
cancer and what you've really done is
taken that person whose life is already
pretty full their bucket is full
and you've added two more drops of water
to that bucket and say now
and Beyond going to your doctor and
getting you know therapy and getting
psychiatric counseling which I think are
all of which are important you also have
to eat Goji berries and stand on your
head every day
right and and I'm like
the patient has cancer give her a break
you know thanks for your holistic
medicine
but but if it's helpful let's make sure
that it works make sure it's tenable
make sure there's some proof behind it
make sure there's scientific evidence
behind it and sure if there is I'm all
for it but don't fill This Woman's
bucket it's full already
great question doctor said Mukherjee
thank you thank you